For Official Use
DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
Organisation de Coopération et de Développement Économiques
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
28-Nov-2014
___________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________
English - Or. English
DIRECTORATE FOR FINANCIAL AND ENTERPRISE AFFAIRS
INSURANCE AND PRIVATE PENSIONS COMMITTEE
REVIEW OF THE OECD RECOMMENDATION ON GOOD PRACTICES FOR MITIGATING AND
FINANCING CATASTROPHIC RISKS: DISCUSSION NOTE
4-5 December 2014
For further information, please contact Ms. Mamiko Yokoi-Arai [Tel: +33 1 45 24 75 26; Email:
mamiko.yokoi-arai@oecd.org] or Mr. Leigh Wolfrom [Tel: +33 1 45 24 81 34; Email:
leigh.wolfrom@oecd.org]
JT03367481
Complete document available on OLIS in its original format
This document and any map included herein are without prejudice to the status of or sovereignty over any territory, to the delimitation of
international frontiers and boundaries and to the name of any territory, city or area.DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
REVIEW OF THE OECD RECOMMENDATION ON
GOOD PRACTICES FOR MITIGATING AND FINANCING CATASTROPHIC RISKS:
DISCUSSION NOTE
Introduction
1.
In December 2010, upon the recommendation of the Insurance and Private Pensions Committee
(IPPC), the OECD Council adopted the OECD Recommendation on Good Practices for Mitigating and
Financing Catastrophic Risks [C(2010)143/REV1]. The High Level Advisory Board on the Financial
Management of Large-Scale Catastrophes 1 was instrumental in the conception of this instrument. The
Recommendation articulates a set of principles that could be considered by governments, and relevant
public and private institutions, in developing efficient strategies to mitigate and financially manage
catastrophic risks from large-scale natural and man-made hazards.
2.
Upon adopting the Recommendation, the OECD Council mandated the Committee to exchange
information on progress and experiences with respect to the implementation of the Recommendation,
review that information and report to the Council within three years of its adoption.
3.
The purpose of reviewing OECD recommendations is to: (1) monitor the policy impact of the
Recommendation and extent of implementation in Member and non-Member jurisdictions; and (2)
consider whether revisions to the Recommendation may be necessary in light of economic, financial, social
and/or technological developments and/or the elaboration of relevant international guidance since the
adoption of the Recommendation. A draft questionnaire [DAF/AS/WD(2014)18] is being circulated for
discussion during the December meeting, and an overview of country practices [DAF/AS/WD(2014)19],
based on information that has been provided to the OECD in the past, is also being circulated to assist
countries when they respond to the questionnaire.
4.
The Recommendation, approved in 2010, provides guidance on the main components of disaster
risk management, from the perspective of the financial management of disaster risks. It outlines an
approach to the financial management of disaster risks, considering the contribution of risk assessment,
risk awareness and perception, risk management, disaster response, and risk transfer. A key message in the
Recommendation is that sound financial management of disaster risk requires a holistic approach that
provides the risk information and data necessary to identify and manage disaster risks, encourages risk
reduction behaviour through risk awareness and appropriate incentives, and promotes cost-effective risk
management through the use of multiple risk reduction tools including land-use planning, building codes,
mitigation measures, effective disaster response, and financial tools.
5.
The Recommendation’s principles for the use of insurance and other financial instruments as
policy tools provide guidance on how insurance and other risk transfer tools can be used to encourage risk
reduction across the various segments of society in a cost-effective way. The principles emphasise the
importance of the availability of financial protection tools and the need to provide incentives to ensure
sufficient demand for financial protection, the role of risk-based premiums in encouraging risk reduction
1
For more information about the Board, please see: www.oecd.org/daf/fin/catrisks
2DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
and enhancing the supply of insurance products, and the benefits of using of the existing private sector
insurance infrastructure for the delivery of financial protection products.
6.
The purpose of this note is to provide an overview of the evolution of international guidance
related to disaster risk management (including recent work under the aegis of the IPPC) and the
implications of that evolution when considering a possible approach for revising the Recommendation.
Delegates are invited to provide their views on the proposed approach at the December IPPC meeting.
Evolution of international guidance
7.
The Recommendation was the first agreed international guidance on developing a framework for
the financial management of catastrophe risks. Other instruments have been developed, before and after
the approval of the Recommendation, to provide guidance on issues related to disaster risk management
and reduction. These include, in particular, the OECD Council Recommendation on the Governance of
Critical Risks [C/MIN(2014)8/FINAL], approved at the 2014 OECD Ministerial Council meeting, the
Hyogo Framework for Action (2005-2015): Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to
Disaster 2 s which is in the process of being replaced by a post-2015 framework on disaster risk reduction,
the Disaster Risk Management Framework developed by World Bank and the Global Facility for Disaster
Risk Reduction (GFDRR) 3 and the G20/OECD Methodological Framework on Disaster Risk Assessment
and Risk Financing. While different in scope and perspective, given the integrated nature of disaster risk
management issues, these instruments provide guidance on a number of the issues that are covered in the
Recommendation, including in the areas of risk assessment, risk awareness, risk management, disaster
response, and in some cases, financial protection.
8.
The OECD Recommendation on the Governance of Critical Risks, developed by the OECD
Public Governance Committee, provides guidance to governments on how to establish a framework for
managing critical risks, including disaster risks. The guidance encourages: (1) the development of an
institutional framework for risk governance: development of a national strategy, leadership and stakeholder
engagement; (2) risk anticipation and assessment: having the capacity for identifying natural and human-
induced threats, resource allocation to risk management, and establishing frameworks to address fiscal
impacts; (3) raising of awareness with the aim of fostering risk prevention and mitigation across society:
communicating risks and risk reduction advice, risk reduction through structural and non-structural
measures, and encouraging resilience of the private sector; (4) development of crisis management
capacities: contingency, recovery, and reconstruction planning and testing of emergency response; and (5)
transparency and accountability in the management of critical risks. It provides guidance on some of the
same issues covered in the Recommendation (in a consistent way), for example, noting the importance of
establishing clear rules for government compensation and the need to examine possibilities for risk transfer
to insurance and capital markets in the context of government exposures.
9.
The Hyogo Framework was endorsed by the UN General Assembly following the 2005 World
Disaster Reduction Conference. It outlines a plan, including five priorities for action, guiding principles,
and practical advice 4 for substantially reducing disaster losses by building the resilience of nations and
communities to disasters. Consultations are underway on the development of a post-2015 framework for
disaster risk reduction, scheduled for finalisation at the Third World Conference on Disaster Risk
2 The Hyogo Framework is available at: http://www.unisdr.org/files/1037_hyogoframeworkforactionenglish.pdf
3 The World Bank-GFDRR Disaster Risk Management Framework is described at: http://www.gfdrr.org/who-we-are
4
The five priorities for action are: (1) governance and leadership of disaster risk reduction; (2) risk analysis and early
warning; (3) building a culture of safety through risk awareness, education and innovation; (4) reducing underlying
disaster risks through planning and mitigation programmes; and (5) strengthening disaster preparedness.
3DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
Reduction in Sendai, Japan in March 2015. A “zero draft” 5 has been prepared, which provides some insight
into how the Hyogo Framework may evolve. The zero draft suggests four priority areas of action: (1)
understanding disaster risk; (2) strengthening governance and institutions to manage disaster risk; (3)
investing in economic, social, cultural and environmental resilience; and (4) enhancing preparedness for
effective response, including building back better in recovery and reconstruction. As in the case of the
Critical Risks recommendation, the “zero draft” of the renewed Hyogo Framework provides guidance on
some of the issues covered in the Recommendation, including the need to account for disaster losses and
social and economic impacts and to promote the scientific contribution to hazard and impact assessment.
10.
The World Bank-GFDRR Disaster Risk Management Framework is based on five pillars of
action: (1) risk identification (risk assessment); (2) risk reduction (through structural and non-structural
measures); (3) preparedness (early warning and crisis management planning); (4) financial protection
(assessing contingent liabilities, budget management, and risk transfer tools); and (5) resilient recovery
(resilient reconstruction policies). The World Bank-GFDRR Framework includes financial protection for
governments, households, and business although this in the context of World Bank and GFDRR technical
assistance programs. Specific published guidance on how countries can implement financial protection
strategies across the various segments of society is not provided in the World Bank-GFDRR Framework.
11.
The G20/OECD Methodological Framework [DAF/AS/WD(2013)6], developed by the OECD
through the IPPC and endorsed by the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in
November 2012, provides international guidance on disaster risk financing, highlighting the importance of
building financial resilience against disasters and the link between DRF and broader DRM strategies. The
Framework provides a step-by-step guide for conducting national risk assessments and using the results of
risk assessment to develop effective financial strategies. The Methodological Framework is specifically
targeted towards providing guidance in areas under the particular responsibility of finance ministries,
including: (1) identifying (and addressing) financial vulnerabilities within the economy, including the
resilience of the financial sector; and (2) ensuring proper fiscal management, including efficient
management of compensation programs and public sector risk reduction investments (see Box 1).
Box 1. Key responsibilities of Finance Ministries in DRM
Financial policymakers play a central role in disaster risk management (DRM) given their responsibilities for
economic, financial, fiscal and budget policymaking, planning of public investment, and coordination of public
expenditures. They play a pivotal role in DRM by:
 Ensuring that financial vulnerabilities within the economy are addressed through adequate and efficient
compensation mechanisms, whether public or private
 Ensuring proper fiscal management of risks by anticipating potential budgetary impacts and planning
ahead to ensure adequate financial capacity and rapid release of funds
 Establishing clear rules regarding post-disaster financial compensation to enable rapid compensation,
demonstrating solidarity and ensuring sound incentives
 Ensuring the soundness and resilience of the financial sector with respect to disaster risks, including
through proper regulation, business continuity planning, and stress testing
 Ensuring the optimal allocation of resources for disaster risk management, including assessment of the
cost-effectiveness of major public investments in disaster risk reduction
Finance Ministers thus have a key role in ensuring financial resilience, a critical component of effective
DRM at all levels of government and society.
Source: G20/OECD Methodological Framework for Disaster Risk Assessment and Risk Financing
5
The “zero draft” is available at: http://www.wcdrr.org/uploads/1419081E.pdf
4DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
Possible approach to renewing the Recommendation
12.
In considering revisions to the Recommendation, the IPPC should take into account the specific
relevance and purpose of the Recommendation as well as objectives that the OECD and IPPC may seek to
achieve in a revised Recommendation.
13.
The OECD, under the aegis of the Insurance and Private Pensions Committee (IPPC) and the
High Level Advisory Board on the Financial Management of Large-Scale Catastrophes, has played a
leadership role in terms of providing guidance and sharing experiences in the area of disaster risk financing
for many years. This has included numerous publications on specific disaster risk financing issues
(e.g. Policy Handbook on Natural Hazard Awareness and Disaster Risk Reduction Education; 6 Risk
Awareness, Capital Markets and Catastrophic Risks 7 ) as well as number of conferences aimed at sharing
country experience in addressing challenges related to the financial management of disaster risks.
14.
The importance of the OECD’s work on disaster risk financing has been recognised by G20 and
APEC Finance Ministers who have asked the OECD to elaborate guidance aimed at enhancing the
financial resilience of economies to disaster risk. G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors
encouraged “further efforts by the World Bank and OECD in cooperation with other relevant international
organizations to leverage the voluntary framework in order to address remaining challenges at their
November 2012 meeting.” 8 APEC Finance Ministers have asked the OECD and other international
organisations “to continue working with APEC member economies in providing capacity building,
introducing good practices and identifying effective approaches that will help address key APEC priorities
related to DRF” at their October 2014 meeting. 9
15.
The Committee has the necessary expertise in terms of the financial aspects of disaster risk
management, including: (1) markets for catastrophic risk transfer, including insurance, for individuals and
business as well as governments; (2) the risk-bearing capacity and resilience of the insurance sector (and
possibly the broader financial sector); and (3) given the presence of Finance Ministries among its
membership, various issues related to fiscal management (such as the identification of implicit and explicit
fiscal exposures, cost-efficiency in public investment decisions, and the design of compensation programs,
tax incentives and subsidies). The international guidance found in the Critical Risks Recommendation and
the Hyogo Framework does not comprehensively address these issues.
16.
The G20/OECD Methodological Framework does address these elements although it does not
provide a comprehensive framework for guiding the development of disaster risk financing strategies – in
many respects, there is a need to update the Recommendation to incorporate guidance from the Framework.
Moreover, it would seem timely and appropriate to align the Recommendation with the recent Critical
Risks Recommendation, so as to ensure their consistency and complementarity while allowing some
elements of the current Recommendation to be de-emphasised (e.g., emergency response preparedness).
6
The Policy Handbook is available at: http://www.oecd.org/pensions/insurance/42221773.pdf
7
Risk Awareness, Capital Markets and Catastrophic Risks is available at:
http://browse.oecdbookshop.org/oecd/pdfs/product/2110051e.pdf
8
Communiqué of Ministers of Finance and Central Bank Governors of the G20, Mexico City, 4-5 November 2012,
see: http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/international/g7-
g20/Documents/G20%20Ministerial%20Communique%20November%204-5-2012-Mexico%20City.pdf
9
21st APEC Finance Ministers’ Meeting: Joint Ministerial Statement, see: http://www.apec.org/Meeting-
Papers/Ministerial-Statements/Finance/2014_finance.aspx
5DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
17.
A revised Recommendation could provide a point of departure for the development of effective
approaches for the financial management of disaster risk, an area of interest for APEC Finance Ministers.
The development of effective approaches has provided the means by which the OECD has been able to
offer implementation guidance in other areas of OECD work mandated by the G20, such as on institutional
investors and long-term financing and financial consumer protection. The identification of effective
approaches would build on OECD survey work (Disaster Risk Financing in APEC Economies: Practices
and Challenges [DAF/AS/WD(2013)15] and the forthcoming report on Global Practices and Challenges
in Disaster Risk Financing [DAF/AS/WD(2013)21/REV2]) and provide more practical guidance.
18.
It could also support an OECD response to the growing demand for guidance on disaster risk
financing among Member and non-Member countries. Given interest from non-Members in OECD work in
disaster risk financing, it would be important to ensure that the Recommendation can adequately address
the agenda and challenges of non-Members. This could be done by including guidance for the specific
circumstances of less developed countries, such as lower insurance penetration. When combined with the
OECD Recommendation on the Governance of the Critical Risks, a renewed Recommendation would
provide a comprehensive OECD framework for managing disaster risks and building economic and
financial resilience, consistent with broader OECD focus on rethinking policy solutions around stronger,
more resilient, and more inclusive growth.
19.
Consistent with the approach taken in the Critical Risks Recommendation, it is proposed that the
Recommendation take on a more “action-oriented” approach, yet still outlining relevant key principles.
Moreover, it is proposed that it focus on providing guidance for Finance ministries and financial authorities
on the development of disaster risk financing strategies in support of financial resilience against disasters.
This could include a set of overarching principles and objectives for the development of such a strategy, as
well as specific guidance on the main components of a disaster risk financing strategy (which is not the
focus of other existing instruments).
20.
The revisions could maintain the key elements of the current Recommendation (such as the need
for integrated approach to disaster risk financing and the importance of considering the impact of measures
on incentives for risk reduction) while re-orienting the guidance towards the development of a specific
strategy and the elements that should be included in that strategy, including the need to undertake a
comprehensive assessment of risk and financial vulnerabilities; the importance of supporting the
availability of financial protection options; and plans for disaster aid assistance and compensation and the
management of sovereign exposures to disaster risks.
21.
Possible elements that could form the basis of a revised Recommendation are provided in the
Annex, which are intended to provide the basis for a preliminary discussion on possible revisions to the
Recommendation. The OECD’s High-Level Advisory Board, which was responsible for the development
of the current Recommendation, will be consulted as the Committee proceeds with its review. Proposed
draft revisions to the Recommendations will be presented next June alongside a monitoring report.
For discussion:
- Do delegates have views on the suggested approach for revisions of the Recommendation?
6DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
ANNEX: POSSIBLE ELEMENTS OF A REVISED RECOMMENDATION
Possible preamble: Reference would be made to the need for a holistic approach, along the lines
outlined in the current Recommendation (need for comprehensive risk assessment, risk awareness and
education, and a risk management approach that seeks to reduce financial vulnerabilities through risk
reduction measures (prevention, adaptation, mitigation), emergency response, and financial tools).
[Development of a disaster risk financing strategy / financial management strategy]

Establishing a strategy for managing the financial impacts of disasters
 Assign national leadership [to Ministries of finance/financial authorities] to develop and
implement an integrated disaster risk financing strategy (built on a foundation of
comprehensive risk assessment, risk awareness and education, and effective and efficient risk
and financial management)
 Ensure consistency and integration of this strategy with the national disaster risk management
strategy and (as relevant) linkage with regional and local strategies, both DRM and DRF
 Ensure sufficiency of resources and expertise across levels of government, the private sector,
and non-governmental organisations, including the scientific and academic community (and
where insufficient, invest in enhancing resources and expertise) and promote the
advancement of research and exchange of information
 Include the following elements in the strategy:
 assessment of risks and related financial vulnerabilities
 support for availability of financial protection options for all segments of society, both
private and public
 ensuring adequate public compensation and financial assistance arrangements, and
develop an effective sovereign risk financing strategy
 Take into account the following principles:
 identifies clear responsibilities and accountabilities for disaster risk reduction and
management
 creates incentives that encourage disaster risk reduction by all stakeholders and
strengthen financial coverage against disaster risks
[Assessment of risks, financial vulnerabilities, post-disaster financial needs]

Establishing comprehensive processes and foundations for assessing risks, identifying
financial vulnerabilities, and assessing post-disaster losses
 Support the development of a national disaster risk assessment process
 Evaluate the financial impacts of disasters, considering direct and indirect impacts and both
regular and extreme scenarios, and identify financial vulnerabilities within the economy
7DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
 Ensure the establishment of relevant hazard, exposure, and loss databases, capable of
supporting the development of disaster risk transfer through insurance and capital markets
and disaster risk financing strategies
 Support the development of internationally consistent methodologies for disaster impact
assessment (pre- and post-disaster) and ensure the tracking of disaster losses
[Support for financial protection options]

Supporting the availability of financial tools for all segments of society
 Supporting the development of effective disaster insurance markets for all material risks, and
capital market capacities for disaster risk financing by:
 establishing regulatory frameworks that support the private provision of disaster
insurance and reinsurance, and the capacity of capital markets to provide risk financing
 ensuring the resilience of financial institutions and infrastructures to disaster risk,
including the capacity to make timely claims payments and maintain the supply of
financing
 raising citizens’ and businesses’ awareness of disaster risks, their responsibility for
managing those risks, and the use of financial protection options and mitigation
 promoting investment in disaster risk reduction at the national, regional, and local level,
to mitigate risks and improve the availability of insurance
 Where the availability or affordability of private financial tools does not allow for acceptable
levels of protection, consider public support through:
 regulatory approaches
 subsidies, tax incentives, or other financial assistance measures to support the
affordability of disaster insurance; or
 establishment of public disaster (re)insurance and other financial schemes
(e.g., guarantees, backstops) to cover uninsurable risks or peak exposures.

Where there is public intervention in disaster insurance markets, ensure that such support is:
 delivered efficiently
 does not discourage risk reduction efforts
 does not impede the development of private insurance markets
[Compensation and financial assistance programmes and management of sovereign exposures]

Ensuring adequate public compensation and financial assistance arrangements, and
develop an effective sovereign risk financing strategy
 Develop public compensation and financial assistance programmes, taking into account:
 the need for government assistance to be targeted and timely, and delivered in an
efficient, fair and transparent manner
 the need to ensure that government assistance does not discourage private risk
reduction or the use of financial tools
8DAF/AS/WD(2014)21
 fiscal constraints and roles of different levels of government in post-disaster response
 Assess the scale of potential government exposure to disaster risks, taking into account:
 the expected costs of relief, recovery, and reconstruction of public infrastructure
 the expected payments and assistance to be provided through public compensation and
financial assistance programmes, and possible ad hoc payments or assistance
 Develop an effective risk financing strategy to manage government exposures considering:
 the use of ex ante financial arrangements such as reserves, insurance, and capital
market instruments, and ex post measures such as budget reallocations and sovereign
debt financing, taking into account the cost, timing and availability of funding sources
 the relationship of any such strategy with national investments in risk reduction
9

